README.md, before:

# yubikey-agent

yubikey-agent is a seamless ssh-agent for YubiKeys.

* **Easy to use.** A one-command setup, one environment variable, and it just runs in the background.
* **Indestructible.** Tolerates unplugging, sleep, and suspend. Never needs restarting.
* **Compatible.** Provides a public key that works with all services and servers.
* **Secure.** The key is generated on the YubiKey and can't be extracted. Every session requires the PIN, every login requires a touch. Setup takes care of PUK and management key.

Written in pure Go, it's based on [github.com/go-piv/piv-go](https://github.com/go-piv/piv-go) and [golang.org/x/crypto/ssh](https://golang.org/x/crypto/ssh).

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1225294/81489747-63a03b00-9247-11ea-923a-b7434bcf7fd1.png)

## Installation

### macOS

```
brew install yubikey-agent
brew services start yubikey-agent
yubikey-agent -setup # generate a new key on the YubiKey
```

Then add the following line to your `~/.zshrc` and restart the shell.

```
export SSH_AUTH_SOCK="$(brew --prefix)/var/run/yubikey-agent.sock"
```

### Linux

#### Arch

On Arch, use [the `yubikey-agent` package](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/yubikey-agent/) from the AUR.

```
git clone https://aur.archlinux.org/yubikey-agent.git
cd yubikey-agent && makepkg -si

systemctl daemon-reload --user
sudo systemctl enable --now pcscd.socket
systemctl --user enable --now yubikey-agent

export SSH_AUTH_SOCK="${XDG_RUNTIME_DIR}/yubikey-agent/yubikey-agent.sock"
```

#### NixOS / nixpkgs

On NixOS unstable and 20.09 (unreleased at time of writing), you can
add this to your `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`:

```
services.yubikey-agent.enable = true;
```

This installs `yubikey-agent` and sets up a systemd unit to start
yubikey-agent for you.

On other systems using nix, you can also install from nixpkgs:

```
nix-env -iA nixpkgs.yubikey-agent
```

This installs the software but does *not* install a systemd unit.  You
will have to set up service management manually (see below).

#### Other systemd-based Linux systems

On other systemd-based Linux systems, follow [the manual installation instructions](systemd.md).

Packaging contributions are very welcome.

### FreeBSD

Install the [`yubikey-agent` port](https://svnweb.freebsd.org/ports/head/security/yubikey-agent/).

### Windows

Windows support is currently WIP.

## Advanced topics

### Coexisting with other `ssh-agent`s

It's possible to configure `ssh-agent`s on a per-host basis.

For example to only use `yubikey-agent` when connecting to `example.com`, you'd add the following lines to `~/.ssh/config` instead of setting `SSH_AUTH_SOCK`.

```
Host example.com
    IdentityAgent /usr/local/var/run/yubikey-agent.sock
```

To use `yubikey-agent` for all hosts but one, you'd add the following lines instead. In both cases, you can keep using `ssh-add` to interact with the main `ssh-agent`.

```
Host example.com
    IdentityAgent $SSH_AUTH_SOCK

Host *
    IdentityAgent /usr/local/var/run/yubikey-agent.sock
```

### Conflicts with `gpg-agent` and Yubikey Manager

`yubikey-agent` takes a persistent transaction so the YubiKey will cache the PIN after first use. Unfortunately, this makes the YubiKey PIV and PGP applets unavailable to any other applications, like `gpg-agent` and Yubikey Manager. Our upstream [is investigating solutions to this annoyance](https://github.com/go-piv/piv-go/issues/47).

If you need `yubikey-agent` to release its lock on the YubiKey, send it a hangup signal. Likewise, you might have to kill `gpg-agent` after use for it to release its own lock.

```
killall -HUP yubikey-agent
```

This does not affect the FIDO2 functionality.

### Changing PIN and PUK

Use YubiKey Manager to change the PIN and PUK.

`yubikey-agent -setup` sets the PUK to the same value as the PIN.

```
killall -HUP yubikey-agent
ykman piv access change-pin
ykman piv access change-puk
```

### Unblocking the PIN with the PUK

If the wrong PIN is entered incorrectly three times in a row, YubiKey Manager can be used to unlock it.

`yubikey-agent -setup` sets the PUK to the same value as the PIN.

```
ykman piv unblock-pin
```

If the PUK is also entered incorrectly three times, the key is permanently irrecoverable. The YubiKey PIV applet can be reset with `yubikey-agent --setup --really-delete-all-piv-keys`.

### Retrieving the management key

`yubikey-agent` sets a new PIV management key, and then stores it in the pin-protected key metadata. If you need to retrieve it (for example, to modify the pin/puk retries with `ykman`, you can do so with `yubikey-agent -get-management-key`.

### Manual setup and technical details

`yubikey-agent` only officially supports YubiKeys set up with `yubikey-agent -setup`.

In practice, any PIV token with an RSA or ECDSA P-256 key and certificate in the Authentication slot should work, with any PIN and touch policy. Simply skip the setup step and use `ssh-add -L` to view the public key.

`yubikey-agent -setup` generates a random Management Key and [stores it in PIN-protected metadata](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/go-piv/piv-go/piv?tab=doc#YubiKey.SetMetadata).

### Alternatives

#### Native FIDO2

Recent versions of OpenSSH [support using FIDO2 tokens directly](https://buttondown.email/cryptography-dispatches/archive/cryptography-dispatches-openssh-82-just-works/). Since those are their own key type, they require server-side support, which has only recently reached Debian and [GitHub](https://www.yubico.com/blog/github-now-supports-ssh-security-keys/).

FIDO2 SSH keys by default don't require a PIN, and require a private key file, acting more like a second factor. `yubikey-agent` keys always require PINs and can be ported to a different machine simply by plugging in the YubiKey. (With recent enough tokens such as a YubiKey 5, a similar setup can be achieved by using the `verify-required` and `resident` options, after setting a FIDO2 PIN with YubiKey Manager: the private key file will still be required, but it can be regenerated from the YubiKey.)

#### `gpg-agent`

`gpg-agent` can act as an `ssh-agent`, and it can use keys stored on the PGP applet of a YubiKey.

This requires a finicky setup process dealing with PGP keys and the `gpg` UX, and seems to lose track of the YubiKey and require restarting all the time. Frankly, I've also had enough of PGP and GnuPG.

#### `ssh-agent` and PKCS#11

`ssh-agent` can load PKCS#11 applets to interact with PIV tokens directly. There are two third-party PKCS#11 providers for YubiKeys (OpenSC and ykcs11) and one that ships with macOS (`man 8 ssh-keychain`).

The UX of this solution is poor: it requires calling `ssh-add` to load the PKCS#11 module and to unlock it with the PIN (as the agent has no way of requesting input from the client during use, a limitation that `yubikey-agent` handles with `pinentry`), and needs manual reloading every time the YubiKey is unplugged or the machine goes to sleep.

The ssh-agent that ships with macOS (which is pretty cool, as it starts on demand and is preconfigured in the environment) also has restrictions on where the `.so` modules can be loaded from. It can see through symlinks, so a Homebrew-installed `/usr/local/lib/libykcs11.dylib` won't work, while a hard copy at `/usr/local/lib/libykcs11.copy.dylib` will.

`/usr/lib/ssh-keychain.dylib` works out of the box, but only with RSA keys. Key generation is undocumented.

#### Secretive and SeKey

[Secretive](https://github.com/maxgoedjen/secretive) and [SeKey](https://github.com/sekey/sekey) are similar projects that use the Secure Enclave to store the private key and Touch ID for authorization. The Secure Enclave has so far a worse security track record compared to YubiKeys.

#### `pivy-agent`

[`pivy-agent`](https://github.com/joyent/pivy#using-pivy-agent) is part of a suite of tools to work with PIV tokens. It's similar to `yubikey-agent`, and inspired its design.

The main difference is that it requires unlocking via `ssh-add -X` rather than using a graphical pinentry, and it caches the PIN in memory rather than relying on the device PIN policy. It's also written in C.

`yubikey-agent` also aims to provide an even smoother setup process.

Commit message:

Allow generating the private key on the computer
This is to allow creating backups of the private key in case the YubiKey
gets lost or damaged. The word "insecurely" is appended to the name of
the switch and a long warning produced in order to make people who don't
know what they're doing turn away and stop what they're doing.

README.md, after:

# yubikey-agent

yubikey-agent is a seamless ssh-agent for YubiKeys.

* **Easy to use.** A one-command setup, one environment variable, and it just runs in the background.
* **Indestructible.** Tolerates unplugging, sleep, and suspend. Never needs restarting.
* **Compatible.** Provides a public key that works with all services and servers.
* **Secure.** The key is generated on the YubiKey and can't be extracted. Every session requires the PIN, every login requires a touch. Setup takes care of PUK and management key.

Written in pure Go, it's based on [github.com/go-piv/piv-go](https://github.com/go-piv/piv-go) and [golang.org/x/crypto/ssh](https://golang.org/x/crypto/ssh).

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1225294/81489747-63a03b00-9247-11ea-923a-b7434bcf7fd1.png)

## Installation

### macOS

```
brew install yubikey-agent
brew services start yubikey-agent
yubikey-agent -setup # generate a new key on the YubiKey
```

Then add the following line to your `~/.zshrc` and restart the shell.

```
export SSH_AUTH_SOCK="$(brew --prefix)/var/run/yubikey-agent.sock"
```

### Linux

#### Arch

On Arch, use [the `yubikey-agent` package](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/yubikey-agent/) from the AUR.

```
git clone https://aur.archlinux.org/yubikey-agent.git
cd yubikey-agent && makepkg -si

systemctl daemon-reload --user
sudo systemctl enable --now pcscd.socket
systemctl --user enable --now yubikey-agent

export SSH_AUTH_SOCK="${XDG_RUNTIME_DIR}/yubikey-agent/yubikey-agent.sock"
```

#### NixOS / nixpkgs

On NixOS unstable and 20.09 (unreleased at time of writing), you can
add this to your `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`:

```
services.yubikey-agent.enable = true;
```

This installs `yubikey-agent` and sets up a systemd unit to start
yubikey-agent for you.

On other systems using nix, you can also install from nixpkgs:

```
nix-env -iA nixpkgs.yubikey-agent
```

This installs the software but does *not* install a systemd unit.  You
will have to set up service management manually (see below).

#### Other systemd-based Linux systems

On other systemd-based Linux systems, follow [the manual installation instructions](systemd.md).

Packaging contributions are very welcome.

### FreeBSD

Install the [`yubikey-agent` port](https://svnweb.freebsd.org/ports/head/security/yubikey-agent/).

### Windows

Windows support is currently WIP.

## Advanced topics

### Coexisting with other `ssh-agent`s

It's possible to configure `ssh-agent`s on a per-host basis.

For example to only use `yubikey-agent` when connecting to `example.com`, you'd add the following lines to `~/.ssh/config` instead of setting `SSH_AUTH_SOCK`.

```
Host example.com
    IdentityAgent /usr/local/var/run/yubikey-agent.sock
```

To use `yubikey-agent` for all hosts but one, you'd add the following lines instead. In both cases, you can keep using `ssh-add` to interact with the main `ssh-agent`.

```
Host example.com
    IdentityAgent $SSH_AUTH_SOCK

Host *
    IdentityAgent /usr/local/var/run/yubikey-agent.sock
```

### Conflicts with `gpg-agent` and Yubikey Manager

`yubikey-agent` takes a persistent transaction so the YubiKey will cache the PIN after first use. Unfortunately, this makes the YubiKey PIV and PGP applets unavailable to any other applications, like `gpg-agent` and Yubikey Manager. Our upstream [is investigating solutions to this annoyance](https://github.com/go-piv/piv-go/issues/47).

If you need `yubikey-agent` to release its lock on the YubiKey, send it a hangup signal. Likewise, you might have to kill `gpg-agent` after use for it to release its own lock.

```
killall -HUP yubikey-agent
```

This does not affect the FIDO2 functionality.

### Changing PIN and PUK

Use YubiKey Manager to change the PIN and PUK.

`yubikey-agent -setup` sets the PUK to the same value as the PIN.

```
killall -HUP yubikey-agent
ykman piv access change-pin
ykman piv access change-puk
```

### Unblocking the PIN with the PUK

If the wrong PIN is entered incorrectly three times in a row, YubiKey Manager can be used to unlock it.

`yubikey-agent -setup` sets the PUK to the same value as the PIN.

```
ykman piv unblock-pin
```

If the PUK is also entered incorrectly three times, the key is permanently irrecoverable. The YubiKey PIV applet can be reset with `yubikey-agent --setup --really-delete-all-piv-keys`.

### Retrieving the management key

`yubikey-agent` sets a new PIV management key, and then stores it in the pin-protected key metadata. If you need to retrieve it (for example, to modify the pin/puk retries with `ykman`, you can do so with `yubikey-agent -get-management-key`.

### Manual setup and technical details

`yubikey-agent` only officially supports YubiKeys set up with `yubikey-agent -setup`.

In practice, any PIV token with an RSA or ECDSA P-256 key and certificate in the Authentication slot should work, with any PIN and touch policy. Simply skip the setup step and use `ssh-add -L` to view the public key.

`yubikey-agent -setup` generates a random Management Key and [stores it in PIN-protected metadata](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/go-piv/piv-go/piv?tab=doc#YubiKey.SetMetadata).

By default `yubikey-agent -setup` generates the private key on the hardware token (a YubiKey device). There's a `--generate-key-on-computer-insecurely` switch that makes it generate the private key on the computer running `yubikey-agent`, import the key to the YubiKey device and print the private key on the screen. This allows creating a backup of the private key in case you lose or damage your YubiKey. This option **should only be used if you know what you're doing**, because generating a key this way exposes it to being exfiltrated or manipulated when importing to the device which makes you less secure.

### Alternatives

#### Native FIDO2

Recent versions of OpenSSH [support using FIDO2 tokens directly](https://buttondown.email/cryptography-dispatches/archive/cryptography-dispatches-openssh-82-just-works/). Since those are their own key type, they require server-side support, which has only recently reached Debian and [GitHub](https://www.yubico.com/blog/github-now-supports-ssh-security-keys/).

FIDO2 SSH keys by default don't require a PIN, and require a private key file, acting more like a second factor. `yubikey-agent` keys always require PINs and can be ported to a different machine simply by plugging in the YubiKey. (With recent enough tokens such as a YubiKey 5, a similar setup can be achieved by using the `verify-required` and `resident` options, after setting a FIDO2 PIN with YubiKey Manager: the private key file will still be required, but it can be regenerated from the YubiKey.)

#### `gpg-agent`

`gpg-agent` can act as an `ssh-agent`, and it can use keys stored on the PGP applet of a YubiKey.

This requires a finicky setup process dealing with PGP keys and the `gpg` UX, and seems to lose track of the YubiKey and require restarting all the time. Frankly, I've also had enough of PGP and GnuPG.

#### `ssh-agent` and PKCS#11

`ssh-agent` can load PKCS#11 applets to interact with PIV tokens directly. There are two third-party PKCS#11 providers for YubiKeys (OpenSC and ykcs11) and one that ships with macOS (`man 8 ssh-keychain`).

The UX of this solution is poor: it requires calling `ssh-add` to load the PKCS#11 module and to unlock it with the PIN (as the agent has no way of requesting input from the client during use, a limitation that `yubikey-agent` handles with `pinentry`), and needs manual reloading every time the YubiKey is unplugged or the machine goes to sleep.

The ssh-agent that ships with macOS (which is pretty cool, as it starts on demand and is preconfigured in the environment) also has restrictions on where the `.so` modules can be loaded from. It can see through symlinks, so a Homebrew-installed `/usr/local/lib/libykcs11.dylib` won't work, while a hard copy at `/usr/local/lib/libykcs11.copy.dylib` will.

`/usr/lib/ssh-keychain.dylib` works out of the box, but only with RSA keys. Key generation is undocumented.

#### Secretive and SeKey

[Secretive](https://github.com/maxgoedjen/secretive) and [SeKey](https://github.com/sekey/sekey) are similar projects that use the Secure Enclave to store the private key and Touch ID for authorization. The Secure Enclave has so far a worse security track record compared to YubiKeys.

#### `pivy-agent`

[`pivy-agent`](https://github.com/joyent/pivy#using-pivy-agent) is part of a suite of tools to work with PIV tokens. It's similar to `yubikey-agent`, and inspired its design.

The main difference is that it requires unlocking via `ssh-add -X` rather than using a graphical pinentry, and it caches the PIN in memory rather than relying on the device PIN policy. It's also written in C.

`yubikey-agent` also aims to provide an even smoother setup process.
